Thank you everyone.
So imagine
that if you
have the ambitions to accomplish
something
that you have to be devoted to it.
You have to concentrate on it. You have
to attend to it.
You have to make it a priority.
And what that means is that
other concerns,
other
other things you could attend to,
other destinations towards which you
might direct your actions. You have to
sacrifice those to that
thing you're devoted to. If you marry
someone,
you declare your devotion to them. You
put them above all other men or women.
You sacrifice the relationship you could
have with all other men or women to that
person. You
put them at the pinnacle of the
hierarchy of your relationships. And you
do that when you well when you start a
new business or when you take on a new
job. If if you are in it wholeheartedly
if you're in it in the manner that would
most assure your success you devote
yourself to it and you make the relevant
sacrifices.
Now imagine
that as you go through your life,
you prioritize one thing and then
perhaps that comes to its conclusion and
then you prioritize another thing. Or
perhaps while you're prioritizing one
thing as you move towards it,
your understanding of where you're
heading transforms and so your direction
shifts. And imagine you repeat that
continually and you do that in good
faith and you continue to pursue your
object of devotion but
you observe that what it is that you're
aiming for transforms across time. Now
that doesn't mean that
the things you were aiming for along the
way were improper.
Although it does suggest that as you
move towards your destination, your
understanding of the nature of that
destination transforms as you acrew
wisdom as you move forward.
I remember reading
the
the autobiography of Leo Toltoy
called Confessions.
Toltoy at the height of his fame he was
the most well-known author in the world
and a master of literature on par with
Shakespeare. He was an aristocrat in in
in Tsarist Russia with immense estates.
He had a large family.
In many ways he had everything even by
his own admission that he could possibly
ask for. and he was desperately unhappy
and suicidal. He sometimes when he was
walking on his estates, he would carry a
rope with him on the off chance that he
would finally make the decision to hang
himself from from a rafter.
And during that time of immense fame and
productivity and
and abundant life and his associated
descent into despair,
he was searching and wrestling.
Wrestling with God, you might say,
wrestling to understand the meaning of
his life, to understand his despair in
the face of everything that had been
granted to him. Tossto's attention
turned more to religious matters as he
became older. But
he ends his book, The Confessions. It's
very short book. It's very much worth
reading. With a vision, a dream. He had
a dream. And he dreamt that he was
suspended in midair. And when he looked
down, there was an abyss of infinite
depth beneath him. And to be suspended
in midair with an abyss of infinite
depth beneath you is a daunting
experience. And you can understand that
experience. It doesn't take much
literary analysis to comprehend the
meaning of that vision. It means that
when any of us look down, we can see the
abyss in front of us. And we can easily
become we can easily despair in
consequence of that sense of vertigo
that the unknown spread out like that in
front of us might produce. But then he
looked up and and what he saw was
he realized that he was suspended by a
rope above this abyss and that the rope
extended upward
farther than he could see. So the rope
above him extended into the infinite
space above
as far up as the abyss below him reached
down.
And then he woke up and that is the end
of his book. And
he understood that
something
invisible and transcendent
supports us above the abyss that extends
below us.
But the book ends there and the readers
left with some resolution of the problem
that Toltoy was facing but with no real
explanation. The resolution was the
hypothesis put forward in the dream
image that we're suspended by something
that supports us above everything that
threatens us. But what supports us?
What is the nature of what supports us?
So one of the things you want to
understand about the way that
that which should be put in the highest
place is characterized in the
Judeo-Christian tradition
is that in the final analysis whatever
God is whatever is to be put in the
highest place whatever is transcendent
is
outside of time and space. It's not to
be found within the confines of anything
that presents itself immediately to us.
And that in the final analysis, its
nature transcends our understanding.
And so that begs the question,
first, does something like that exist?
And second, if it does exist, yet it's
incomprehensible, ineffable, and
transcendent, how are we to understand
it? And what is the nature of our
relationship to it? So imagine that
you're devoted to something
and you pursue it and as you pursue it,
your understanding of what it is that
you should be devoted to transforms and
broadens. So what that implies is that
what's good and motivating calls to you
is that which grips your attention and
motivates you. But as you approach that
destination
and become wiser in consequence, your
understanding of where you're headed
broadens and deepens or becomes higher
and and more significant.
So then you could posit that behind the
things that call you is that which calls
to you as such which makes itself
manifest
as you approach it but continually
recedes. So the idea would be well
there's always another mountain to climb
and that there's a sequence of mountains
that never end
and that the peak of each successive
mountain is higher than the peak of the
mountain previously and that the
ultimate destination is the vanishing
point of all those peaks.
That's what's at the top of Jacob's
ladder.
That's the the heaven. That's the heaven
that Jack climbs when he climbs the
magic beantock. Right? That's a
representation of the sacred tree at the
center of the cosmos that shaman have
been climbing for 100,000 years. That
which is at the peak of that that
recedes as you approach it and that
calls you continually to what's better
and better.
That's what's properly put in the
highest place.
That's the good as such. It's another
way of thinking about it. Now that
phenomenon of
ultimate value,
it's that phenomenon of ultimate value
that shines through everything of value
that attracts you in your life.
This is what happens to Moses, for
example, when he encounters the burning
bush. So Moses is going about his
business as a shepherd. He's a good
shepherd. He has a couple of wives. He
has a good life. He's attending to his
flock one day performing the duties of a
typical
productive and
protective man. And something beckons to
him that's off the track. Something
calls to him. It captures his attention
and he goes to investigate. And as he
approaches it, he realizes that it's a
tree that's on fire. The tree that's on
fire, that's the tree of life.
A tree has been a symbol of life
forever. And there's there's many
reasons for that.
Not least that life itself has branching
forms that make themselves manifest in
the morphology of trees, but in the
branching relationship between kingdoms
of animals as they progress through
time.
in the branching
structure of of the blood vessel system
that keeps you alive.
That replicating and differentiating
structure that's treelike is central to
life itself. And a a tree that's on fire
is something that is and is becoming at
the same time. It's something that
exists and is transforming at the same
time. Of course, life has that
characteristic because you are what you
are, but at the same time, you are what
you are becoming. And it's the
combination of those two things really
that makes you alive. Form plus plus
possibility transforming itself into
form. And what Moses encounters is a
manifestation of that central pattern of
life.
Greer and Catherine, their four-year-old
son, was diagnosed with a degenerative
illness that initiated a discussion
about resilience in children. Resilience
in general. It's a challenge for any
parent to figure out when to nurture,
when to push, when to comfort, how that
works. It sounds like your son is social
and he's verbal and he's smart and he's
imaginative. Certainly, your task is
going to be to help him find his way.
He's going to have to be the person who
figures out how much he's going to be
willing to fall on his face. I want to
be an oak tree, but also a source of of
light. My daughter was very ill for
several decades.
She was doomed with her illness and she
figured it out and she's like firing on
all cylinders. So, who knows what you
what you can manage if you maintain your
upward orientation.
You don't have to have all the answers.
You just have to have answers to the
questions he's asking.
[Music]
When something calls to you, that's what
you encounter too, when something
makes itself interesting to you,
when you find yourself compelled by
something, when you fall in love with
someone, when you're motivated by forces
outside yourself to pursue something
that interests you.
The same thing has happened to you that
happens to Moses. And Moses follows
this. Moses has the faith to investigate
what it is that fascinates him. And he
he approaches it and investigates it.
And as he does so, his experience
becomes deeper and he begins to
understand that he's starting to tread
on sacred ground. And he takes off his
shoes, which means he's not going
anywhere, which means he abandons his
specific identity. His shoes are am em
emblematic of identity which is why you
can walk a mile in someone's shoes in
order to understand them. He abandons
who he is in pursuit of what he could
be. And the consequence of that is that
a voice speaks to him out of the depths
of the burning bush and then announces
itself as the spirit of being and
becoming itself.
And what that means is that if you
pursue that which calls you deeply
enough, the voice of the spirit that
gives rise to order itself will make
itself known to you. And we know that
because we know all of us know that if
we pursue something deep deeply, if we
pursue something with commitment, if we
are devoted to something and pursue it,
that
our understanding of that deepens, that
makes us deeper. And that as our
understanding of that
particular
phenomenon
deepens, we start to understand its
connection with everything else. And the
deeper and there's no limit to the depth
of that. And the consequence of that,
and this is the consequence for Moses,
is that the revelation of the spirit of
being and becoming to Moses transforms
himself into the sort of person who can
lead the enslaved out of tyranny into
the desert and toward the promised land.
And so what that means is that that's
what makes Moses into a leader is that
he takes what compels his attention with
all due seriousness,
investigates it wholeheartedly, allows
his identity to transform as a
consequence,
and transforms himself with the help of
what it is that's
calling to him. transforms himself into
the sort of man who can stand against
tyranny and overcome the proclivity
to slavishness,
who can navigate through the desert and
who can find the final
optimized destination. And that's a
pathway that is open to everyone and
that's indicated by the fact of calling
and and interest.
That's a characterization of God. That's
a characterization of God. Now, what
happens in the biblical corpus is that
the spirit that recedes and that calls
forward is characterized in the biblical
stories and
The reason for that is so that the
nature of that spirit can be made clear
so that
individuals and societies can organize
themselves in productive harmony. The
biblical stories are a library of
characterizations of God.
So God is this spirit that calls us
forward is represented as a character
and as the character to whom ultimate
devotion should be paid. So so that
that's a this is a definition. It's
something very much worth understanding
that the hypothesis is that imagine that
you are devoted to something. It might
even be devoted to your own
self-interest. But let's assume that
it's devoted to an enterprise or that
it's devotion to your family or it's
devotion to your wife or your husband or
to your friends.
There's something that's like the spirit
of devotion itself that lurks behind
that because you think about it this
way. Different people are devoted to
different things, but that doesn't imply
that they're not devoted. And so there's
something common about the fact of being
devoted across instances of devotion.
And there's something lurking behind
what makes you devoted. That's the
spirit of devotion itself. And that's
the spirit that makes itself manifest in
the burning bush. And that's the spirit
that's characterized in the biblical
corpus. So let's walk through the
characterization. And I'm I'm going to
tell you a very specific story tonight.
I'm going to tell you the story of the
Tower of Babel, but I want to put it in
context so that what it means is a very
short story, but what it means can be
fully understood.
The Tower of Babel is Genesis 11.
There's 11 chapters of characterization
that precede it. And I'm going to walk
through you through the
characterizations. Each of the biblical
stories is a characterization. Now, we
might want to investigate what it means
for something to be characterized first
so that you understand that that's what
happens. That's what you're trying to
experience when you go see a movie or
when you read a work of fiction or when
you listen to any story is you're you're
immersing yourself in a
characterization. Now, if you go see a
James Bond movie, you're you're going to
see a characterization of the spirit of
romantic adventure.
And the reason that you do that is
because you want to understand that
spirit because there's part of you that
would like to be devoted to the spirit
of romantic adventure. And you can tell
that there's a part of you that would
want to be devoted to that because you
wouldn't go see the movie. Otherwise,
you wouldn't find yourself compelled by
the romantic adventure that unfolds. And
so that you could think of the romantic
adventure that's encapsulated in a James
Bond movie as a call to movement in a
particular direction. And you could
think of the James Bond character as a
reflection of that which calls to you as
such. Right? Now, I'm not making the
claim that the James Bond character is
the ultimate characterization of what
calls to you, but it might be a
sufficiently
it might be a characterization that's
sufficiently beyond your current ability
to act as a mediator between you and
what's behind it.
Right? And you you you know that
even in a characterization that's as
associated with with popular culture as
the James Bond hero
that the characterization is a call to
romantic adventure. Right? It's a dream
of romantic adventure. It's a dream of a
mode of being which would be a a
characterization. It's a call to a mode
of being that's beyond
the limited confines of
often all too dull normality.
And the fact that you're compelled by it
at least sufficiently to pay for the
movie is an indication that there's a
part of your spirit that's yearning to
be released from the
prison walls of insufficient normality.
And the reason you're called to that is
for the same reason that Abraham is
called by God to leave the comfort of
his father's tent even at his advanced
age and to journey into the world and to
have his terrible adventure. And the
reason that that's compelling to Abraham
is because we're called to have the
terrible adventure of our life.
And to the degree that we fail to do so,
then our heart yearns in that direction,
and we will seek out
substitutes and pathways forward
to attempt to move us toward that goal.
Why the call to romantic adventure? Why
the high order and dangerous adventure,
let's say, that's
characteristic of an action adventure
movie? And the answer is well it's
related to the vision of doltoy is that
the abyss that lays itself out beneath
us is so deep the the suffering and and
complexity of life is sufficient that
only uh noble adventure can justify it.
And so without that devoted striving
toward what's ineffable and
transcendent, the abyss makes itself so
manifest that it's dispiriting and
disheartening.
We're not after security. That's why God
calls Abraham out of his security, his
infantile security. We're not designed
for security. We're not designed for
infantile safety.
were designed for romantic adventure.
In the first book of Genesis, God is
characterized as the spirit that
confronts possibility with love and
truth and makes the order that's
habitable. The order that is good and
habitable. What does that mean?
Well, people are made in that image.
Well, so what are people like?
People are conscious characters.
And what is it that you're conscious of?
And the answer is you're conscious of
possibility. And in fact, that's what
you're consciousness is for.
Those things that you can predict that
are familiar and stable
because they're predictable and familiar
and stable. You don't have to be
conscious of them. In fact, you aren't.
The things that don't change, you don't
attend to.
It's the things that transform and
transmute in front of you that you
attend to. And that's because you have
the opportunity
in the face of that which is still only
possible to wrestle with that
possibility and to transform it into
optimally the order that is good.
And it's in so doing that you find your
identity with the spirit that called
forth order from chaos itself. Not only
at the beginning of time, but now and
forever.
Shopify powers millions of businesses
worldwide, supporting everyone from
established brands to entrepreneurs just
starting their journey. You can create
your professional storefront
effortlessly with Shopify's extensive
library of customizable templates
designed to reflect your brand's unique
identity. Boost your productivity with
Shopify's AI powered tools that craft
compelling products, descriptions,
engaging headlines, and even enhance
your product's photography, all with
just a few clicks. Plus, you can market
your business like a pro without hiring
a team. Easily develop and launch
targeted email campaigns and social
media content that reaches customers
wherever they spend their time, online
or offline. If that's not enough,
Shopify offers expert guidance on every
aspect of commerce, from inventory
management to international shipping
logistics to seamless return processing.
If you're ready to sell, you're ready
for Shopify. Sign up for your $1 per
month trial period and start selling
today at shopify.com/jbp.
Go to shopify.com/jbp.
Again, that's shopify.com/jbp.
And it's participation in that pro it's
participation in that process that puts
you
that makes you able to walk
unself-consciously with God in the
garden and that
establishes with God the order that is
good or very good.
In the story of Cain and Abel, God is
further characterized as the spirit that
requires the
the best of all possible offerings in
relationship with man.
That's the spirit of conscience. That's
a good way of thinking about that. Cain
is the man who offers what's second best
to himself and other people and the
world and to God. His sacrifices are
second rate and they're
rejected.
God is characterized as the spirit that
rejects anything but the offering of
what's best.
And you might say, well, I don't believe
in that spirit. And I would say,
don't be so sure that you think that you
know what you believe. People are very
complicated and it's a very rare person
indeed who isn't subject of his own
conscience.
In fact, the rare person who isn't
subject to his own conscience is
somewhere is someone that you don't want
to be near and somewhere you don't want
to be with him.
Your conscience is that which calls you
out when you
offer what's less than your best to
yourself and to your fellow man, to
society, to the world and God. And
there's no difference between that and
the inddwelling voice of conscience.
And that's a characterization of what
should be put in the highest place and a
definition of God. Conscience has an
autonomy.
It's something we wrestle with. It's
something that appears to be part of us,
but acts in a manner that's only
dependent on its own will
in that if you transgress against your
own conscience,
you'll call yourself out. And
inescapably,
you can strive to ignore
the betrayal of the relationship that
the rebellion of your conscience
indicates. But
the more you attempt to silence what it
is to know, what it is that you know to
be true in relationship to your own
shortcomings, the worse things will
become for you.
And the hypothesis in the story of Cain
and Abel is that what is to be put in
the highest place, the source of all
devotion, that to which all sacrifice
should be devoted, is the spirit that
speaks that speaks in the voice of
conscience.
It's also the spirit that rewards proper
sacrifice. And you can ask yourself too,
do you believe in the existence of the
spirit that rewards proper sacrifice?
Well, so ask yourself this. If you have
a son and you love your son, isn't it
the best part of you that offers him
reward in proportion to the integrity of
his offerings? Isn't it the Isn't it the
encouragement that
makes the best of him
make itself manifest? Isn't it the
encouragement of the best in you saying
to him,
I'm impressed by what it is that you
managed.
Do more of that. Isn't that the the
basis, the most fundamental basis of the
best relationship you could possibly
have with him?
Isn't that the basis of the best
relationship you could have with
yourself or with the people that you
love? To observe what it is that they do
when they're wholeheartedly devoted to
something, when they're all in in their
sacrifices and they're wending their way
up the sequence of mountains forward.
And it isn't it exactly what every son
wants from his father for that
relationship to be the case.
God says to Cain, "If you do well, you
will be accepted." And God is therefore
the spirit that accepts if what is good
is done, but also the spirit that judges
and rejects if what is best is not being
offered. And that's represented in that
story as the ultimate manifestation of a
combination of the combination of mercy
and justice that makes up what is
ineffable and divine.
Cain rejects all the guidance that
spirit could possibly provide.
Becomes bitter,
resentful,
and murderous. His children and
grandchildren become
corrupt and genocidal.
And that's the pathway of degeneration
away from
adherence to the call of the spirit that
moves people endlessly upward.
Cain's children, they're also the
builders of the first cities.
They're the
artisans who first make musical
instruments. They're the craftsmen and
metallurgists who make weapons of war.
They're
the engineers who
offer technological solutions to
spiritual problems.
That becomes relevant in the story that
I am going to tell you.
Cain's descendants
who've turned away from
direction by the ineffable
multiply and fill the earth and
propagate the sin of Cain everywhere.
producing a society that's bitter and
resentful and deceitful and
self-centered and unwilling to offer its
best
and prideful and narcissistic
and technologically obsessed and
hedonistic
and that's why the flood comes and in
the story of Noah God is characterized
further as the spirit that calls to the
wise even in times of trouble
to prepare in good faith
to
shepherd their family through the
inevitable flood.
And that's what you do as a wise man and
woman
if you
have maintained the clarity of your
vision and the integrity of your
thoughts so that your intuitions in
times of trouble can warn you when it's
time to prepare. So that you do that not
in fear but in good faith. And that when
you do that you thereby protect
yourself,
shelter your family,
keep society thriving and act as proper
steward to the natural world
which is what Noah does when he
preserves the animals on the ark.
his family, himself, his wife, his
family, a microcosm of society and the
natural order itself on the ark he
constructs as a consequence of attending
to the manifestation of the ineffable
speaking within that warns him that
chaos is about to descend.
And that brings us to
the Tower of Babel.
I don't know if you've been following
the news in recent days.
I said that the
children of Cain were the engineers,
but but more particularly,
they're the builders who put what they
build in the place that's reserved for
God. They're the
prideful intellect's temptation to
elevate the technological enterprise to
the highest possible place to look for
salvation in the technological realm.
What happened to Google in the last two
days?
The Google engineers along with computer
engineers everywhere are
madly engaged in the construction of
super intelligences that have mapped
the domain of
that have mapped the domain of the word.
And Google devoted its AI project to
unholy
ideological propositions
and
produced a super intelligence whose
image-making capacity instantly
falsified not only the present but the
past in the service of those delusional
presumptions.
That's a tower of babel.
This is the story. And the whole earth
was of one language and one speech.
That's the symbol on the back of the
dollar bill. What does it mean?
Means there's a hierarchy of value
and that everything within that
hierarchy of value should be devoted to
one thing
which is at its apex
which isn't part of the thing but rises
above it.
that's associated with clear eyed
vision.
That's the symbol of value that your
economy is predicated upon. This ancient
idea,
why is that of one language and of one
speech?
Because
a hierarchy of value that has the
appropriate
attentive eye at its pinnacle
unites people psychologically
and socially
to the degree that your country is
united.
It's united because
you all act out and implicitly believe
the same story. And the story is
symbolized
in that image.
What's at the top?
What does Christ say in the gospels?
There are none so blind as those who
will not see. Well, that's the opposite.
This symbol is the opposite of that. The
the story that unites man and society
properly places
the eye that is willing to see whatever
is in front of it at the pinnacle of
all.
To the degree that a person or a society
unites itself under that singular
vision,
then it
maintains its orientation.
Allows people to maintain their hope in
relationship to a direction.
stops people from experiencing the
anxiety that a multitude of competing
directions produces and ensures a
productive, generous social unity.
Everyone speaks the same language. What
does that mean to speak the same
language?
It means there's no dispute about what
is a woman. When the Tower of Babel
becomes too
deviant, when it aims itself
sufficiently far off the mark, words
themselves lose their meaning and
everything collapses. In Babylon, the
Tower of Babel, Babel means Babylon.
Babylon
in the biblical corpus stands for the
presumptuous civilization.
Babylon, Rome, Canaan, Sodom, Gomorrah.
There are variants of the idea of
civilization gone astray.
What's a Tower of Babel? Well, at the
time in the Middle East, at the time of
Babylonia, there were literal
competitions between kings to build the
highest
structure, the highest ziggurat, the
highest pyramid.
Not for the glorification of God, let's
say, not to further not even to further
technological development as such, let's
say, in the service of life more
abundant for the citizens of a given
polity, but to
provide the emperors, the kings and the
tyrants who funded the construction
with
means of self arrandization.
If you're serious about improving your
health, but often ignore your gut
health, then that's a huge mistake. The
gut is foundational to how you feel, how
you function, and how you think. When
your digestion is compromised, so is
everything else. That's where Peak's
poor tea comes in. It's a fermented tea
used for centuries in traditional
medicine, backed by science today. Rich
in probiotics, prebiotics, and
antioxidants, the substances your body
actually needs to heal and regulate
itself properly. Many of our Daily Wire
teams love sipping on Black Pore tea in
the morning. No crash, no jitters, just
calm, sustainable energy. Plus, after
meals, the green pore tea helps
digestion and makes you feel lighter and
clearer. Peak's pur tea isn't just high
quality, it's the highest quality. Wild
harvested from 250-year-old trees. No
pesticides, no artificial ingredients,
and it dissolves instantly in water. No
steeping required. Plus, Peak is trusted
by leading doctors and health experts,
including Dr. Mark Heyman and others who
have spent their careers researching
what truly supports long-term health.
And they recommend Port Tea for a
reason. Now, Peak is offering our
listeners a special offer. 20% off for
life. That's not a onetime discount.
That is a long-term investment in your
well-being. They'll also throw in a free
rechargeable frother and glass beaker
with your pore bundle. Plus, with their
90-day moneyback guarantee, there's no
risk, only the opportunity to feel and
think better. Head over to
peaklife.com/person.
That's peaklife.com/person
to get 20% off for life. Start taking
your health seriously. Start today.
The higher the tower,
the more the king justified his
the presumption that he could challenge
the divine order.
The Egyptians raised their pharaohs to
the level of gods
and so did the Romans when their society
deteriorated.
It's the It's in the nature of an
overweening tyranny to elevate
its earthly representative to the status
of what should be ineffable to the
status of the ineffable and transcendent
guiding spirit.
And the consequence of that is always
that the tower comes crashing down. It
came to pass as they journeyed from the
east that they found a plane in the land
of Shinar and they dwelt there. Now
there's a backstory to this and the
backstory is something like this is that
the people of Shinar decided to
centralize right and to pass all
authority into a centralized authority.
That's a good way of thinking about it.
Instead of maintaining
responsibility and authority in a
distributed manner they centralized.
Right? So you can think of these towers
as the attempt to build a top- down
utopia. That's a good way of thinking
about it. A top- down utopia with the
wrong
spirit
constructing it and at the pinnacle.
That's the continual technological
proclivity of the pridefully obsessed
intellect.
Cain establishes the pattern of improper
sacrifice.
Cain's descendants, Cain becomes
fratricidal and murderous. his
descendants become genocidal and chaotic
and technologically obsessed. The
consequence of the chaos is the flood.
That's the destruction of the world by
the return of chaos. The Tower of Babel
is the destruction of the world by
authoritarian
presumption. And those are the two
sociological or political catastrophes
that are associated with the sin of
Cain. So what does that mean?
If you refuse to offer your best
and in consequence your offerings are
rejected, you're unsuccessful, you'll
become bitter and resentful.
If you determine to nurse that
bitterness and resentment and let it
take you where it wants to,
you'll become the murderer of your own
ideal,
the destroyer of your own hope and a
rebel against the cosmic order. Your
descendants will either bring about the
flood that eradicates the world or
construct the authority authoritarian
tower that makes
everyone
whose inevitable consequence is
the degeneration of society into into
incomprehensibility.
So what's a totalitarian state?
Let's take the Soviet Union. Who's God
in the Soviet Union? Well, clearly
Satan. But under him, Stalin. Let's say
it's Stalin. Well, what does Stalin
worship? Power. Okay. How is language
demolished under Stalin?
Well, what's a totalitarian state? You
might say, well, it's the top down
imposition of pathological order by a
handful or even a sole actor. But that's
naive because one person cannot control
20 million people.
It's not possible. You need an army of
willing slaves. If you're going to be a
tyrant, you need an army of willing
slaves. What sort of slave do you have
to be to be tyrannized by a single
tyrant? How about the kind of slave that
abandons the meaning of his words?
You've all watched Pinocchio.
Pinocchio is enticed into pleasure-
seeeking by the offer of a vacation that
he deserves because of his neurotic
suffering.
The figure that entices him to the
vacation paradise is the coachman who
drives the
chariot, let's say, full of delinquents
to the island of hedonistic pleasure.
What happens on the island of hedonistic
pleasure? The juvenile delinquents
destroy the culture
and they turn into brain jackasses who
can't say a word.
And underneath the palace of pleasure
are the slavers waiting to enslave them
in the mines.
Why do the boys turn into jackasses?
Because if you sell your soul to the
devil in return for cheap pleasure,
your voice will be stolen, you'll
sacrifice your voice as an offering.
Well, that's why the words decay,
right? Because words with no truth have
no meaning. They're nothing but babble.
The totalitarian presumption
is not so much the dominance of
otherwise freedomloving
citizens by a tyrant, but the
willingness of every single person who
dwells inside that tower
to use every word they ever utter
only to represent falsehood
to maintain the tyrannical tower and to
enslave themselves.
The totalitarian state is the total grip
of the lie. And the lie, the grip of the
lie is no different than the descent of
words into incomprehensibility.
And so you might want to remember that
the next time you're called upon at your
workplace, let's say, or even in in the
company of your friends, to utter words
that you know to be false or to remain
silent when you're called upon by your
conscience to say something that you
know to be true.
You wonder why we can't agree on the
most basic facts, let's say, such as
what is a woman? The answer could well
be that we've built towers of Babel that
are a little bit too high and a little
bit too presumptuous.
centralized authority taking to itself
the right to reshape the world as a
consequence of nothing but technological
prowess
in the service of false gods
generates a technological nightmare
that destroys meaning itself.
And they said to one another, "Go too,
let us make brick and burn them
thoroughly." and they had brick for
stone and slime they had for mortar. Now
you have to understand that this story
is not about the dangers of technology
per se. It's not about the evil of the
technological enterprise or the evil of
knowledge. It's about the willingness to
put the technological enterprise it's
it's about the willingness to make the
technological enterprise take the place
of God. Right? You could think about it
this way.
We have hydrogen bombs.
That's a pretty close technological
approximation to God. Do we have the
wisdom to
use them or not use them wisely?
That's not a technological question.
A technology that's not in the service
of what is put in the highest place
becomes the spirit that builds the tower
of babel and makes it impossible for
people to live together or to
communicate. And that's happening around
us with incredible rapidity.
And they said go to let us build a city
and a tower whose top may reach unto
heaven. That's the motif of the
displacement of what is
properly ineffable and transcendent.
That's the replacement of the
transpersonal cosmic order with the the
doctrines that currently
dominate.
There is a reason the communists
attempted to eradicate the religious
enterprise.
The reason was that that the communist
dogma and the profits of the co
communist dogma
wanted to replace the entire
enterprise devoted toward transcendence
with themselves.
And we all know the consequences. All of
us who want to know know the
consequences of that. All of us who want
to know know that the consequence of
that was the descent of an entire
civilization into a hell that destroyed
tens of millions of people. And not just
in Soviet Union, in Mauist China, still
in North Korea, still in communist China
for that matter, because everything
that's going to happen in communist
China has not yet happened. You can be
sure of that.
Do you know that the Chinese engineers
have built Skynet?
Do you remember Skynet from the
Terminator? Do you know that the Chinese
call their 700 million closed circuit TV
camera monitoring system that recognize
everyone's faces and everyone's gate?
You know they call that Skynet. Do you
know the engineers who were asked about
that said we're building the good
Skynet?
You know how close we are to that here?
The technologies there. We copied the
Chinese during the pandemic.
If you don't think that we could do that
again, you're sadly mistaken. And you
might ask, well, what would protect us
against that? And the answer is
something like
the willingness of each of us, the the
devotion that each of us must manifest
to what should be properly put in the
highest place. And it's not the
technological utopia that the power
adult engineers
present us with.
That's what's happening in China.
They're going to produce our
totalitarian state that's so complete
that George Orwell himself could have
couldn't have imagined it in his worst
nightmares.
700 million closed circuit TV cameras
watching absolutely everything you do.
Every single thing you purchase tracked,
every place you go monitored, every word
you say,
recorded, analyzed, assessed by
artificial intelligence.
Well, you saw the artificial
intelligence that the Google engineers
just produced. How would you like that
monitoring absolutely everything you do
for the rest of your life?
Let us build a tower in a city whose
taught me reach unto heaven. Luciferian
presumption. Let us make a name, lest we
be scattered abroad upon the face of the
whole earth.
And the Lord came down to see the city
and the tower which the children of men
build it.
How is God characterized in this story?
The God we wrestle with, let's say. How
is God characterized in this story? God
is the spirit that punishes presumption.
God is the spirit that pres punishes
intellectual presumption.
The sin of Adam and Eve is a sin of
pride. The sin of Cain is a sin of
pride. pro. Cain believes that he can
offer what's second best and and benefit
and escape from notice. He believes that
he can offer what's second best and fool
himself and fool the people he's around
and adapt to the world and pull the
wools over wool over the eyes of God.
Pride.
Pride goes before a fall. What punishes
pride?
That's part of the biblical
characterization.
Do you believe in God? Do you believe
there's a spirit that punishes pride?
Has that spirit made itself manifest in
your own life? Are those times that you
overreach yourself, especially when you
know that you've overreached yourself
and you fail in consequence, is that is
that the just and merciful unfolding of
the cosmic order? If it's not, then why
does your conscience call you out when
you in the aftermath of that error, of
that overreaching, of that presumption?
And the Lord came down to see the city
and the tower which the children of men
built. And the Lord said, "Behold, the
people are united, and they all have one
language, and this they begin to do,
and now nothing will be restrained from
them. go to let us go down there and
confound their language that they may
not understand one another's speech. No,
for centuries even it depends on the
interpretation that the casual
interpretation of the Tower of Babel is
that this is the attempt by
superstitious people to
hypothesize about the origin of multiple
languages.
That's not what it means at all.
It means that the consequence of
centralized
unidimensional
prideful
mad power seeking is a fractionization
and atomization of a society that's so
complete that no one person can
understand anyone else.
That's a vision of hell.
the collapse of the Tower of Babel. And
it's a vision of inevitability because
the idea is that
any system of unified totalitarian power
will inevitably degenerate into mutual
incomprehensibility and collapse. And
you can ask yourself, well, do you
believe that that's the case? It's like,
well, how how else do you approach the
history of the 20th century? What
happened repeatedly to the various
towers of babels that we built
politically? What happened to the Soviet
Union? What happened to Nazi Germany?
What happened to Ma China? What happened
to Cambodia? What happened every single
time
people in their intellectual pride
attempted to build a structure that was
oriented toward some destination other
than what should properly be placed in
the highest place?
The answer is people degenerated into
mutual incomprehensibility.
Chaos emerged and we built hell.
Not the hell we could still yet build.
And that's for sure.
So what does that mean with regards to
you Americans?
Your society is remarkably robust and
resilient and it's remarkably free. I I
don't think it's any exaggeration
to claim that you have the freest and
most resilient society in the world. So
what's great about your country?
Well, you have your country is
predicated on the notion that you are
each created in the image of God and
that you have a domain of
intrinsic worth that manifests itself in
two ways. One, it manifests itself as
your rights in relationship to the
state. Not that the state grants them,
but that the state is to find its limit
at the border of the rights that are
intrinsically yours as a consequence of
your essentially valuable nature. And
associated with that is a commensurate
responsibility. With every right there's
a responsibility. And so the
responsibility that each of you bear as
sovereign citizens citizens is the
responsibility to maintain order within
your lives. Maintain maintain and
produce the order that's good within the
confines of your life. To take care of
yourself and to find the adventure of
your life in that ability to be the
captain of your own ship, the master of
your own destiny. To do that well enough
so that you can dare marry. To do that
well enough so that you can take care of
a family. so that you can be of service
to your community, so that you can serve
your state and your country under God.
That distributed responsibility, that's
the alternative to the Tower of Babel.
That's laid out very clearly, by the
way, in the book of Exodus, where the
concept of subsidiarity emerges. And the
concept of subsidiarity is a vision of a
hierarchy of distributed responsibility.
That's the antidote to slavery and
tyranny. You can see that reflected in
your political structure because there's
no it it it resists centralization. You
have a division of power.
But more than that, you have a you have
a a state of states. And the states
themselves, like the towns and the
cities, have their domains of power and
responsibility.
And so the authority that could be
centralized in a single
entity is distributed across the entire
pyramid
all the way down to the individual. And
that makes your society remarkably
robust. One of the things that I've
observed as a Canadian watching you
Americans for like 50 years,
I can remember in the 1980s there was a
widespread fear that Japan was going to
emerge as the reigning financial master
of the world.
And that threat seemed to be credible
for about 5 years, six years, something
like that. And Japan centralized. And
you Americans didn't. And there were
plenty of places in your country that
weren't doing the right thing. But there
were plenty of places that were doing
the right thing. And out of those places
that continued to do the right thing,
new
abundance flourished. And you do that
all the time. You did that again in the
1990s. And it's a consequence of the
manner in which your state is structured
right from the individual upward. It's a
consequence also of your willingness as
individual citizens. And I also see this
as characteristics of the United States.
One of the things that characterizes
your society that's very unique and
maybe unique even among Western
countries is that you wholeheartedly
admire
productive, generous competence. That's
at the core of the American dream.
Right? If if people in this country,
people who make it in consequence of
their own honest and upward striving
efforts are genuinely admired.
And that's your wealth really.
And that's also your recognition that
technological prowess and even material
abundance
can be positive goods if they're put in
the right place.
That's like anger and that's like
sexuality and that's like fear. All of
these things can be beneficial in their
right place. That ambitious striving
that makes your land rich and rife with
opportunity and possibility and beauty
and cultural richness
is a consequence of the positioning of
that material ability and security and
opportunity in the proper place in the
hierarchy of values that strives
properly upward.
Your the founders of your republic knew
this because they understood that your
rights were self-evident
as a consequence of the embeddedness of
your culture in an underlying in the
underlying Judeo-Christian tradition
that produced that positioned what was
properly sovereign above everything that
was political and beyond above and
beyond everything that was merely
political and that simultaneously called
upon each citizen and the leaders of the
citizens to pursue their individual
pursuits and their political endeavors
in light of their commitment to what was
properly put in the highest place. And
that is precisely what's made your
country rich.
I don't know if you know of an economic
phenomenon called the resource curse.
People, especially of the leftist
persuasion, believe that countries are
wealthy because of natural resources.
But there is no relationship between the
natural resources of a given country and
its wealth. In fact, the relationship
statistical relationship is slightly
negative. Why?
Because unearned wealth is an invitation
to corruption and instability. And
that's what happens in resourcerich
countries.
Your country is rich because your people
are by and large ethical. Your country
is rich because by and large the default
transaction between individuals in the
United States is honest. There is no
other natural resource than the truth
that makes honest trade between
strangers possible. With that in place,
every desert can bloom. That's why LA
exists. Well, I mean it. It was a
desert. The entire western part of your
country was uninhabitable. It's the
cooperative, productive generosity of
your citizenry that made that harsh
environment not only habitable but
wealthy.
That's a consequence of the orientation
of your society not towards these tower
towers of this tower of babel gigantism
but towards its distributed
responsibility and rights and its
orientation
towards the proper uppermost goal.
Therefore is the name of it called Babel
because the Lord did there confound the
language of all the earth and from
thence did the Lord scatter them abroad
upon the face of all the earth.
The fundamental characterization of God
in the opening chapters of Genesis is
that God is the spirit that
orients itself upward and
transforms chaotic possibility into the
order that's habitable and good.
That's the garden in which man is
placed. Man is a and woman because it's
in it's insisted upon in the text that
this characterization applies to both
sexes. Men and women are made in the
image of God. And so they are
reflections of the proclivity to bring
order to chaos.
We bring order to chaos through the
practice of proper sacrifice. What does
that mean? To put things in their proper
place. to aim up and to let go of
everything that interferes with that aim
to make the proper sacrifices that
establishes the appropriate order. We
deviate from that sacrifice at our
peril. The pathway of insufficient
sacrifice leads to murder and chaos and
totalitarianism and genocide.
The pathway upward
eternally produces the order that's
benevolent and good that allows us life
more abundant and the freedom to pursue
it to
steward the garden properly and to
to walk unself-consciously with God as
we proceed our way up Jacob's ladder.
So, thank you very much.
[Music]